it is okay my man this is two o'clock in
the afternoon where I'm at on October
10th 2018 so uh should I just call you
Jordan should I call you uh cave like
mr. cave light my first name is
pronounced aisel but as you could
imagine living for so many years in
places like Cambodia and what have you
you get real open-minded about how
people should pronounce your name so
I've had different nicknames where I
lived all over the world and yeah so in
Chinese I'm dying and in lotion I was I
so on and so on and so forth so yeah I
do I do well you know um my major the
major I finished with was political
science but you know basically was
political philosophy that I was doing
and in a lot of ways already coming out
of high school what I was really doing
and the opportunity for me university
was studying philosophy but the question
was sort of him what department was I
gonna do that and there were a lot of
struggles initially what I wanted to do
was a major in economics which I thought
of as the philosophy of poverty but I
got there it's a bunch of a bunch of
alcoholics trying to get rich you know
what was what was going on in the
department of economics was not now what
I was looking for her
yeah no it's just you know the nature of
the courses and the nature of the people
studying and that was a big big letdown
to me so I ended up in in political
science but yeah in terms of what I was
actually reading on my own time and what
I was learning cuz most of what I
learned at university was very much
despite what was being taught in class
and not because of it it was very much a
philosophy and you know I I exhausted my
interest in European philosophy and then
moved on to Asian philosophy where at
the end of my be a Buddhist philosophy
and you know as a dude working on
Buddhist philosophy from about ten years
learned Pali he lived in Asia Poly's the
ancient scriptural language of the
religion
did a lot of work on that and now partly
just because I date younger women you
know my girlfriend is is 25 and just in
terms of the last the last couple months
in the last year she was really asking
me where she should start with or
possibly even finish with philosophy so
we've actually done quite a robust kind
of reading course so we both went back
to the ancient Greeks so for her that
was her first time reading big names
like Aristotle and Socrates through
Citadis and what-have-you and for me it
was my second or third time reading
those books but some of them like right
now I'm still reading Aristotle's
politics it's very long through yeah but
but but but reading it I haven't read it
since I was 19 or something but the last
time I read a business oh it's it's
almost like reading it for the first
time because I'm such a long time but
yeah so looking at getting those books
getting through the gatekeepers to do
really good work even at Discovery
Channel was something really good
the payoff isn't great because the
amount of viewers that you're that are
seeing it unless it's a massive
documentary which is really difficult to
have yeah
so you know turning towards the internet
and shorter videos viral videos whatever
if you can you know the amount of videos
short videos that I've done that been
seen by a couple million people versus
right by a committer I did I saw by ten
thousand people so it's like trying to
figure out now in 2018 looking forward
what's the best way to reach people to
engage them right well look my my
perspective this is a little strange
filmmaking both is and isn't part of my
life you know I've made over 1,000
videos on YouTube but I do not think of
that as filmmaking most of the time but
you know just about to two or three days
ago there's a there's a website I'm a
part of which is mostly people who are
put it this way it's people who are
already bored of veganism they're not
new vegans that people have been in the
scene for long time and they were asking
for suggestions for debate topics you
know within this this group and this is
my auto suggestion said you know what I
like to see you debate is how are we
gonna make a Netflix TV series and I say
you know I'm thinking of a Netflix TV
series that's not about veganism but you
know something that competes with Walt
Disney and the kids shows that are on
there already you know a lot of which
are really bad I know what's a good
spongebob competes with SpongeBob
SquarePants or something and where it's
not about veganism but where it's really
getting across the important moral
messages of our time kids shows always
have I mean Sesame Street is always a
woman right okay are you thinking of the
the right yeah sure
right
if you think if you think you're really
not more ethical than anyone else you
haven't hung out with the right people
yet there are some people so how do you
really package that in a way that's
entertaining interesting personal story
of striae or whatever you know hero
story whatever that might be like what
is that and what you know you were to
make up dumb right now what would it be
because I you know I'm oh good thing
you're starting at the deep end of the
swimming pool that's a good way to start
my channel so you're not you're not
disillusioned later with who is way to
see hunger who is yeah that's good
most people discover my criticism of
these figures after years and sometimes
thousands of dollars invested in them
right but look you know I have a
five-year-old daughter so for me you
know one project I started to get
rolling was writing a children's
storybook and you I assume you haven't
seen it but I could send you the length
okay
right right so reading it only takes
three minutes or something I mean it's
it's a it's a picture book there's not a
lot of text there I mean so that again
it's not I mean it is it is vegan
propaganda but it's not a pamphlet and I
mean I know so many vegan parents and
again from different backgrounds there's
really a terrible paucity I have seen
the books that are already out there and
they're pretty lousy in a bunch of
different ways and it's it's very easy
to write things that are preachy or like
a pamphlet and you know this is not
we're talking about so in terms of
filmmaking and cultural production one
side of his egg would have already
mentioned something to compete with
SpongeBob SquarePants somebody to
compete with Sesame Street something to
compete with Curious George
in terms of storybooks but even if I
were making something for adults I would
probably be looking at something to
compete with Game of Thrones or
something to compete with Star Wars you
know I don't think I'd be looking at all
to reproduce what documentary films have
already done
oh really really broadly speaking you
know I think the impact that vegan
documentary films could could have hit
their pinnacle when Oprah Winfrey first
covered veganism so to my memory I
believe that was 2012 you could google
it and maybe I'm slightly off but I just
put a belt then about 2012 and of course
at that time YouTube was really growing
very rapidly for many many people that
was the first time they'd ever seen
slaughterhouse footage is the first time
they'd asked themselves tough questions
about where does meat come from where
does milk come you know these kinds of
questions and you know this sort of the
shock of oh my god they actually you
know insert their fist up the cow's anus
while impregnating them on these dairy
farms all that was new and shocking and
it got on Oprah Winfrey's TV show at a
time when Oprah Winfrey was the most
powerful figure in American mainstream
media um but that is now over and we're
now into a much longer period of time
much longer stage of the game when
veganism is not any more exciting or
interesting than campaigns to get people
to quit smoking so emits a powerful
comparison one that's not that easy to
say with so you were mentioning before
the you know people you consider to be
and politically astute people but they
continue eating meat you may well know
people who continue smoking cigarettes
like whites who are ethical in other
parts of their lives right right right
right that's right right oh but I think
but I think that's the end of the debate
I think that's the problem in the
ultimate answer to veganism like the
answer to you should quit smoking is I
don't care and that's all it's
ultimately what's you're up against
right and you know the same right that's
right right yes right that's right and
they well and they don't care so you
right but you know I'm not I'm not I'm
not even being devil's advocate here I'm
just stating that in terms of the
position we're in because your question
was about filmmaking and what can
filmmaking do now well the answer was
very different in the year 1992 I'm in
the year 1992 it's like okay we have
this story we have these fundamental
facts about where where meat comes from
where milk comes from maybe where fur
from comes from some Stan we have this
explosive documentary footage and the
story to tell and nobody knows it yet
that's comparable to the stage I would
say right around the end of World War
two almost nobody knew that cigarette
smoking was really bad for you so if
some people know some scientists some
health research there were some people
who knew that cigarette smoking
especially within the United States of
America it was a mainstream view that
smoking cigarettes was healthy for you
that like track athletes would run
better if they smoke cigarettes these
were widespread beliefs in like the
1930s completely ridiculous course but
then after World War two there's again
for a documentary filmmaker II to look
we have this story to tell cigarettes
they're actually poison they're actually
bad in various ways and I think there
are questions of ethical responsibility
and so on to in terms of smoke cigars Bo
regardless that was new
and shocking let's say 1945 up to 1960
or 1959 or thereabouts you know but then
by the 1980s it's old everybody already
knows cigarettes are bad for you put it
this way everybody already knows that in
a perfect world there would be no
cigarettes one way or another whether or
not you personally have to go through
the withdrawal symptoms of quitting in
this vague perfect Wilson era so the
same way
we're now coming into a much longer
period of struggle where more and more
people will be aware of yeah you know
what in a perfect world milk cow milk
wouldn't be produced by having this cow
stand in a shed and be you know anally
probed and goes this horrible existence
um but it's not shocking it's not new
what happened with Oprah Winfrey
promoting veganism for a month it's
never gonna happen again
lightning doesn't strike twice it's old
news it's become part of the constant
background noise of Western civilization
culture so the the nature of the
struggle and challenge ahead of us you
know including as filmmakers myself
being a zero budget filmmaker on YouTube
you don't woman to some extent what I am
doing is making films but I'm not going
for that that shock reaction and in a
sense I'm also really not that
interested in telling people something
they don't they don't already know
so I'd say that this is just within that
I mean I think it's quite correct to
call it entertainment I actually I made
uh just nerves about your email I made a
really simple note on one piece of paper
here that one things I want to say to
you is that I see it as kind of a
four-part challenge and one one of the
four parts is is entertainment
so there's activism and activism
narrowly defined because the other three
parts here activism there's an academic
side to the debate there's an
entertainment side and then there's the
food industry side of what's going on
avignon so a food industry being you
know companies actually producing vegan
meat or soy milk in this campus right
this this this this side of challenge
but the the entertainment side I use the
word entertainment because III again I
don't really see that as
you know there's this shocking news
do you know where cow milk comes from
that that was the case I think as
recently as the 1990s people really
didn't know and people didn't know what
a slaughterhouse looked like and so on
and now they do and again the the
creative challenge looked at george RR
martin in his book series the Song of
Ice and Fire Game of Thrones there's a
list of political themes he wants to
meditate on a lot of them going back to
his own youth during the Vietnam War I
mean you know he's still messed up about
what happened with the Vietnam War and
you know consequences of this and so on
would you fight sure that's not that's
not a criticism but my point is sorry so
the author of Game of Thrones and Song
of Ice and Fire
George RR Martin's so he said he's a
best-selling on there but yeah I just
say but you know what he produced wasn't
a documentary about democracy or you
know the Vietnam or something
he created a form of entertainment and
fiction that you know that brought these
themes you know to a to a mass audience
now again it is different with children
but I think probably for filmmakers
whether you're talking about an adult
audience or a children's audience
the next step for veganism I think is
going to be you know a step in that
direction where we really do look at
entertainment as entertainment and very
obviously something like science fiction
can embody and address these ethical
these ethical problems mmm you know what
more easily than fiction set in medieval
times good or what have you but yeah I
think I think I think that's gonna be
the road ahead and not trying to
recapture the excitement you know of say
I know it's recent history but for me I
think you know lightning doesn't strike
twice we don't get that we're not gonna
get that impetus again Wayne's young
right
using let's say I got to know him got
access to him and followed him and the
ups and downs a good person bad person
who he is
good Giants game getting tackled
personal story that it doesn't matter
the veganism is the just the device but
it's really about a personal struggle to
accomplish something and it's dealing
with you know legal issues and you know
where capitalism and socialism meet or
whatever the different factors
regulation for asti regulation what are
all the things that are you know big
discussion points in our culture but
through a personal journey and whether
it's him is there another person that I
don't know about or is there another is
our sting operation that's 10 years in
the making of the most intense like
undercover videos that will be seen you
know will hopefully come out in the next
couple of years that will you know
obviously right but something that's
still newsworthy that's you know that
you might have your pulse most people
right so that's I think that's the
fundamental I think that's the
fundamental thing I'm challenging you
want I think Wayne's young is very much
hung up on that but I mean after a
certain point the fact that cigarettes
give you cancer is not newsworthy the
fact that a particular movie star even
has died of lung cancer is barely
newsworthy and it was shocking when
those those things were first being
realized by the American public but it's
not shocking more it's never gonna be
shocking anymore in the same way
I mean um where do fur coats come from
you know how could we possibly have
footage that's more horrifying and more
graphic than what's already out there I
mean like it really is I mean by the way
I'm not being sarcastic every so every
every so often I have to edit that kind
of footage and it's amazing to me that
it still can upset me or disgust me you
know editing footage of that because you
know I do my own small parts of
filmmakers
baby chickens go into an incinerator
right now right so I just say I'm not
I'm not you know I'm not um scoffing at
the impact that has on people including
the effect it has on me when I when I
work with it um but you know I think in
a sense we got a bit of a free ride
because of that shock factor that
supported our you know our our cause and
then once you're once you're past that
shock fester the factor there's there's
a much greater you know um creative
creative challenge there now you know
someone like Wayne's young so I mean
what what if instead we took so that's
someone from the activist side you could
have someone from the academic side you
could have a university professor who
does you know animal rights and veganism
there are a few examples you could have
someone from the food industry side you
could have one of these you know one
businessman who's you know promoting
vegan food and vegan cuisine I know a
couple of examples you could follow any
of those people but I think exactly what
you have to let go of is the thought
that there's something there that's
gonna make headlines as you're saying or
that there's gonna be an investigation
there's gonna be a film clip of what
really happens on the farm so what once
that's gone what's what's the story
[Music]
sure and you know um you know as I say I
mean whether we think of it in terms of
science fiction or children's storybooks
or any of this stuff you know I think
there were a lot of people who want to
get across these kinds of messages
that's something that I may pursue but
in the meantime I'm also looking whether
it's a set of short videos that's like a
series whether it's potentially animated
like we talked about
yeah yeah well obviously it's it's up to
you but I mean what what are the facts
you want to get across and who is the
audience for them you you know I mean
it's it's very saddening to me that all
the time I deal with these these
provinces of knowledge whether they're
political or what-have-you look okay
I'll give you the simplest example you
know when I was in Toronto Toronto
Canada I was interested in a lot of
different political and ecological
issues and ethical issues but many of
them didn't touch people's lives
directly so you know whether you're
interested in slavery or the history of
Cambodia or something like veganism that
can all seem a bit distant but then I
started doing political campaigning on
on water pollution and this very
directly included the water people were
drinking out of their own taps you like
it's a water polluter Anto is on a lake
it's not a river so this is pollution
going into the lake and then coming
directly into your tab then you're
you're drinking it
bathing in it correctly and you know I
was aware with something like air
pollution that can be a bit abstract
well there's this cloud in the sky and
it kind of goes away and this you know
this was so visceral it's like oh really
and no you don't know you know what you
get to witness is the extent to which
people don't care they really sincerely
genuinely don't care you know so whether
it's something like that or you know I
mean I'm in Cambodia I'm at a place
where mass murder and torture took place
and I'm talking to someone face-to-face
about the CIA's role in this and what
its role is and people don't care so you
know I just say look I mean I I
sympathize but it's easy to go through
life looking for that reaction or trying
to generate that that kind of reaction
through drama whether it's whether it's
whether it's with you authorship through
research and in a textual basis or
through filmmaking but I think
especially with veganism it's it's it's
it's misguided I think um you know art
and artifice I think has to kind of take
you in a different direction that way
yes shock value is easy it's easy to
shock people but I mean look at still
today I mean this is still a part of my
life so many people still support
communism tomorrow I'm going up to the
University campus there's a professor
there
the professor I'll be seeing she still
supports communism she was encouraging
her students to memorize the lyrics to
the Internationale which is a communist
anthem basically and you know I've
written essays myself with really
shocking vignettes of you know mass
murder and torture and starvation and
you know kind of the worst elements of
communism and people are able to shake
that off and ignore that and say well
they they don't care so me given this
this capacity in human nature it's it's
not surprising to me what people's
attitude is towards meat and cigarettes
and and even alcohol whiskey and all
these other things yeah yeah I'm sorry
I'm trying to be sympathetic but I mean
yeah that's that's kind of the warning
of who you talking to
[Music]
right but wasn't there um I'm sorry but
but I've seen several Killick coming
back to this basic premise that we can
never go back to the year 2012 I think
you will doubtless remember
cowspiracy that came out but I think
just a few months ago Natalie Portman
came out with another film of the center
and again we're way past the point of
diminishing returns and now I can't say
no but
care about natalie portman so it didn't
have zero impact on plant life right
right right but my point is lightning
doesn't strike twice I don't think I
don't think that's happening again right
and it's called the game changers yes
for been in the trailer has been out for
a year now but I do think that that at
least right this this national football
players not look at this guy massive
well III well III agree with you and I
disagree with you to some extent because
here's the thing what I've always said
about the health argument and veganism
is that the crucial thing we just have
to get across is that being vegan is
possible because a lot of people
genuinely think it's impossible I see
that in Asia if it was like they
actually think you need meat to live or
you need dairy to live so once you've
got across that it's possible yes
generally speaking of course being vegan
is actually healthier than eating meat
but to me that's that's really a
secondary question the first question is
can you be vegan can you sustain health
in life on a vegan diet the answer is
yes now you know are you actually going
to be healthier than someone who's on a
very disciplined pescetarian diet you
know if you eat all junk food as a vegan
and they have it's theoretically
possible you know there's a there's a
caveat stupider so but I'll leave that
aside of the 7 question here's the
problem um those athletes are talking
about do they smoke cigarettes or no no
nobody cares that athletes don't smoke
cigarettes it's not galvanizing or
driving the the anti-smoking movement
the fact that these these athletes are
again
can we put together a documentary about
how all the best Olympic athletes refuse
to drink alcohol I'm not saying all of
them but probably a very large
percentage of people who are high level
athletes refuse to drink alcohol what is
the impact of that on the culture of
drinking alcohol almost zero so again
I'm saying this challenge you I'm not
saying that has zero significance sure
there are all kinds of celebrities like
beautiful women and male weightlifting
athletes who look good and eat a vegan
diet but guess what on the cover of
Cosmopolitan magazine every month
there's someone else who eats meat and
drinks alcohol and smoke cigarettes and
may smoke marijuana or do other drugs
who also is beautiful either as a model
or actor or weightlifter or athlete or
what have you and I don't think that has
this galvanizing highly impactful effect
for a sobriety movement nor for an
anti-smoking movement nor can we really
expect that for the vegan movement so
just put in the cabbie here when I offer
these criticisms I'm never claiming that
there's zero efficacy that's not you
know even even like the most ineffective
forms of Act is look if I just stand on
the sidewalk and hand out pamphlets
saying stop stop anemic right and you
know when you hand out pamphlets it's
always also people who already have
something going on in their head there's
someone who was already nine-tenths of
the way there and you happen to give
them that you know which were you can
only take credit for having a small
impact no you're gonna you're gonna have
some impact but again III really I
really think it's misleading I really
think it's misleading to hope right I
wouldn't expect a big impact I wouldn't
expect that to to change headlines or
change the culture the basic fact that
many successful athletes eat a vegan
diet so what many successful athletes
are completely sober in Husted refuse
drug alcohol infuse of smoke
advocacy right in the activism what do
you think right interesting that's
happening in whether it's visual or not
that's happening in the vegan world we
even leave it if it's inside baseball
like you know like yeah two evenings
what is the most interesting thing
that's happening that you're seeing that
you're like oh this is this I wanna know
more about you know it all rests on
donor support this is the the brutal
reality that most people in interview
will not tell you so you say what's
interesting or what's exciting or what
am i hopeful about for the future I can
only be hopeful about things that are
gonna have 65 year olds donating money
to support them which is again another
reason for me not to be wildly
optimistic about athletes or you know
sexy people in in bathing suits which
you know has its has its role in the
movement it's fine I'm not I don't hate
on it so much um when I look at an
organization like PCRM Physicians
Committee for Responsible medicine the
question I have to ask is can we have
two three many PCRM can we have ten or
twenty and can these sorts of
institutions or initiatives can they
develop the kind of the kind of self
evident legitimacy that gets them donor
support which is predominantly going to
be from wealthy people over 65 years old
so then this again this may seem very
bleak but that that really is my hope in
terms of what can happen right now um
you know is there a lot already going on
that I'm hopeful about you know no no
I'm not and the framework of what we've
already said already says it why like am
i hopeful that Paul Bashir you know
standing around with people wearing
masks on the street am i hopeful that
can now go up to the next level and have
some kind of bigger and better impact no
not at all
not at all and I'm not hopeful about
direct action everywhere and someone I
think a lot of those things have already
kind of hit their peak or hit their
limit and these are you know these these
are for related reasons but you know
there is the
the real prospect of doing what PCRM has
done in terms of lawsuits challenging
things that are illegal or unhealthy
that are going on okay sorry let's say
illegal and you just flushed a little
bit is it legal to have schools teaching
schoolchildren that eating two eggs a
day is healthy from chicken eggs you
know it may or may not be legal but it's
probably something you can challenge at
city hall or in court through various
forms of public redress whether or not
it's legal in a particular jurisdiction
may may stand to be debated but in many
jurisdictions it's not it's not legal
for coca-cola to come in and tell
schoolchildren hey kids it's okay to
drink it or it's good to drink a can of
coke every day so or of course not the
cigarettes is unthinkable so they're
they're a matter of principle there and
again the the organization that can do
that you know another one I like to
point out is the problem of chromium
hexane with leather this is a toxic
pollutant issue but you know whether you
can get the wedge in on demanding
labeling we say hey look can we have
labels saying what this really is and
what the consequences are whether those
the because you can label things for
ecological consequences as well as
health consequences and and what have
you
whether it's at that end or whether it's
again challenging the school boards and
challenging these kinds of things about
about what they're doing the potential
for that to create a plurality of
respectable organizations like PCRM
that's about the only thing I can really
be be positive about right now so I'm
looking at my own little note from my
one note here about the four sides of
the equation the activist side you said
other than the activist side the
academic side the entertainment side and
then the food industry side you know um
there's nothing happening on the
academic side nothing so if you want
hope I mean it's it's got to go up from
here it's got to get better than where
it is right now have you I mean you know
again I know you have been in the game
that long but I don't think you hear
about people like oh wow did you hear
about this great research that was done
as part of someone's PhD
thesis on veganism or somehow really
diggin ISM you know given that there's
an enormous amount of department
resources going into feminists research
you know academic feminism academic
Human Rights discourse a lot of academic
political discourses that don't
necessarily lead anywhere to change the
world there's obviously the potential
for veganism to to start making a
difference in the world via academic
institutions and that hasn't happened at
all yet so I am extremely cynical about
academic institutions but I think and
say even if you're just starting from
zero and getting up to the the same
level that that should be happening now
in the next ten years yeah yes yeah yeah
[Music]
yeah yeah Canada you know we founded
Greenpeace it's a Canadian or originally
and the founders of Greenpeace every
single one of them ate meat smoked
cigarettes and drank alcohol and a lot
of them used to work on fishing boats
they'd worked in the fishing industry
they're from east coast of Canada it's
well I met a couple of those guys
there's one I really remember meeting
and speaking to but I think some of
those because I was involved in ecology
admittedly before I was vegan but I was
already strictly vegetarian back then I
was vegetarian and I refused to buy
leather I was I was kind of vegan in
principle but now I really barely heard
the word vegan back then but anyway I
was sure the vision it blew my mind back
then I mean how can you you know how can
you front for this cause without without
being volunteerism so you're right but
in what you'd be describing there is the
potential of veganism to co-opt things
that are already going on in ecology um
you know and then the question you ask
is is there anything really hopeful and
positive enough going on in ecology that
veganism co-opting it is going to be a
very positive big deal is going to make
this gonna make a big difference
Yeah right I mean you know what why do
people care so much about Star Wars or
why did they care in the past um you
know it's a story about ordinary people
doing extraordinary things big you know
myth mythological sized themes and
conflicts you know something like the
the extraordinary success of Game of
Thrones both the books and the the TV
show again there are very fundamental
themes of honor and duty and
self-sacrifice and you know it does get
into what is feudalism and what is
democracy
eventually this is like more than three
thousand pages into the text I mean
there there are there are real you know
questions people find very compelling
being played with a lot of this stuff
and especially if you're looking at
Batman and spider-man a lot of it is
kind of simultaneously adult
entertainment and children's
entertainment which is also it's a
curious feature of Western civilization
now that we know we tend to make this
kind of children's entertainment but
it's actually so dark and violent in its
themes that it's only appropriate for an
adult audience this is a you know I'd
say the most of the Batman movies and
that kind of thing it's like that but
you know I just point out there there's
a hunger for entertainment with real
substance and dealing with with those
those kinds of themes and any or all of
those themes I mean it's it's very easy
for me to imagine that someone who's
just cognizant of veganism and ecology
you could throw in a few others but
veganism and animal rights ecology could
start producing
fiction you know to that out of that
background it happened once in a really
weird way with the philosophy of Arthur
Schopenhauer a bunch of people include
mostly authors at that time this is
really before cinema but authors and
playwrights made a lot of works that
featured the question of cruelty to
animals and animal rights based directly
on Schopenhauer's influence and
Schopenhauer's theory of of art and and
compassion Schopenhauer put forth the
general idea that sympathy or compassion
is the basis of all ethics and then in
this this was shown in whether or not
you felt compassion for an animal even
when you were killing it for me yourself
and so on so that's anyway that's a
couple hundred years ago there have been
other kind of ideas like that that
played out in in the arts but yeah I
think it's fair to say in that in that
theater veganism hasn't yet had its turn
it bad it's not yet it's not yet boring
and I think that's kind of the the
challenge you have to you have to play
when you you represent a cause or a
problem that everyone already knows
about it look what if I ask you this
question this would be really really
hard what if you wanted to make a film
now in 2018 trying to get the message
across that the war in Afghanistan has
to end it's very hard cuz everybody
already knows and nobody cares everybody
already knows about Afghanistan now you
know go back to the year 2004 or
something okay you know this is the you
know the shock value is there and do you
realize what we're doing in Afghanistan
there's gonna be this sense of sturm and
drawing built into it but now today the
same ethical issues are really really
hard to broach in fiction or in
documentary so no I mean it's that kind
of transition that kind of much maturity
or maturation of the cause that we have
to prepare ourselves for yeah
yeah to ten years when they get over the
it's weird well my hope for that is
limited because of my experience with
Buddhism and Asia what you say is true I
mean that there's this fundamental issue
of making veganism easy that's what
those industries are accomplishing but
you know I've lived in Taiwan and Taiwan
is still to this day the most advanced
nation in the world that way because of
the basis of Buddhism and Taoism but
what I found in Taiwan was that the
easier you make veganism the more the
common run of man regards it with a kind
of contempt you know doing doing what's
easy isn't what's respected or you know
what's regarded as a steer or impressive
or an accomplishment
if climbing a mountain is easy and
anybody can do it then than so what it's
just letting happen to do that weekend
and I saw I saw and felt a lot of that
in in Taiwan and where I'd meet people
who were in vegan restaurants but they
were meat eaters there just happened to
be going to vegan restaurant they're
regarded as one style of food out of
many that they sometimes ate the same
way you might sometimes go to a
Vietnamese restaurant or a Thai
restaurant it's just another form of
food in the market and you really got
the sense Moo
a couple times people said to me oh look
you know after chatting with you for
awhile they found me quite intelligent
area - oh but you can't possibly be
vegan because their assumption really
was that vegans were these
superstitious people who believed in
ghosts and we're doing things to avoid
getting bad karma and so on they're this
really low opinion of vegans even as the
food becomes easier easier to get and
easier to enjoy as the lifestyle so I
just say you know facilitating something
at the same time makes it facile makes
it easy puts it in a position of
contempt whereas you know just just a
couple of years ago when I told people
yeah you know I was vegan whether I said
I was vegan in Saskatchewan or vegan in
even when I was in conveying but I was
vegan in in in China and you nan um and
people really say oh wow like that that
must have been hard like how did you do
it you know how did you manage this
you know didn't have problem this is
that well and there and there is this
kind of grudging respect for it just
because it's something hard to do so
it's it's a double-edged sword
um but I mean there's definitely the
possibility that veganism becoming an
industry having this support I hope
that's gonna create you know ultimately
this all relies on donations
I'm filmmaking there's some income
there's sign Oh some films break even
some turn a profit many don't
many are done image vases but you know
um you know the prospects for vegan
activism like PCRM PCRM is not going to
turn a profit
ever pedda people with Ethical Treatment
is not going to turn about ever so all
of this rests on that on that donor
driven basis so sure there's the hope
that the proliferation of vegan bacon
and vegan milk substitutes and vegan
cheese that it'll it'll create a
material basis for um for like I say the
proliferation of two three many PCR M's
many legal challenges many of those
Democratic agencies
private people private entities or they
yeah organizations companies like Ford
Foundation type you know you know the
Ford Foundation Ford Foundation has come
up many times in my life I've lived at a
strange life you know says that's a good
question and you're right they are
highly eccentric multi millionaires so
I've pointed this out repeatedly in in
my videos but so Gary Yourofsky who was
a big deal five years ago and now isn't
gary yourofsky was the most vocal
best-known voice and vegan activism
about five years ago why oh you are oh f
sk why gary yourofsky and you can search
within my channel I have a playlist of
videos in which I'm criticizing him he
was an obscure part-time substitute
teacher in Detroit Detroit Michigan
United States and to all reports he was
living in poverty which I can believe
even if you're rich in Detroit you live
in poverty it's pretty rough it's pretty
powerful though as as a supply teacher
in Detroit I have no reason to think he
was he was affluent in any way brought
way to pretty tough life and he was
putting all of his time and effort into
vegan activism on his on his you know on
this basis out of his garage so to speak
and one you know multi-millionaire the
former guitarist for the rock band Queen
so you're old enough you can probably
remember when Queens a really big deal
so the the good but the guy is
apparently I've looked it up he is
incredibly wealthy this this musician
he's you know some musicians are broke
but he's not one of them yeah so it he
you know he perfect he personally met
this guy and selected him and started
putting money behind him and then what
do you know he's going on world tour and
he's becoming this high-profile figure
and he's doing interviews with the
mainstream news and so on so something
like that that might seem you know in
the slang parlance of our time might
seem organic it might seem grassroots
it's not it's very much the product of
one donors intervention so I have been
told that about other other vegan groups
and individuals who've emerged from
obscurity that the crucial first step
for for Wayne's
young for direct action everywhere was
and again I've been told this by many
sources and there is some verifiable
evidence for it with the donations they
received from from Ingrid Newkirk Ingrid
Newkirk who is the founder of peda I do
not know if the money came from her
personal bank account or if it was
funding directly from petaa like from
agency to agency
I suspect the latter that it was
actually peda giving them the startup
money to do what they're doing so yeah I
mean ultimately in these countries we're
talking about activism is about money it
doesn't exist without donations or it's
invisible without a net you know it just
you know it can be it can be one man
standing on the sidewalk with pamphlets
but you don't get above that in terms of
organization or impact now it is
different in a Muslim society it is
different in a Buddhist society the
structure and function of charity is
very different if you're in some other
society but definitely in the United
States and Canada the only prospect we
have for building institution a building
community in veganism is going to be
donation driven the big exceptions being
for-profit food industry and someone
like you if you get out there and say
hey I want to make a movie that has the
best aspects of Star Wars and the best
aspects of Game of Thrones and the best
aspects of dune and you know here it is
you know here's my project you know and
the moral of the story
maybe it's several points or in several
levels actually does relate to veganism
it does relate to the fact that animal
will suffer the same way humans do or
something there's something you're
getting across you know in this script
or in this story but this really has the
ability to make money you know whatever
it's starring Natalie Portman I don't
care it is you know that's also
different because then you're taking it
out of that out of that donor driven
loop yeah so no it's I'm not optimistic
and you know talent is really really
thin on the ground there there are not a
lot of talent I know cuz now I've been
doing this I mean you know I've been
blessed I haven't been tied down with a
full-time job I've really been shaking
hands and talking to people and reaching
out to people
so intensively in the in the last five
years yes
yeah I mean it works but it's it's not
in a sense that I was hoping it would be
because I was really hoping that patreon
could be a crossroads where I yeah where
I meet and get organized with other
activists that was really what I was
hoping was to create a little you know
network of people actually do things
with um but you know anyway something
but frankly some of that is my fault
my message is not appealing to that many
people people find me intellectually
intimidating I don't want to work with
me yeah right right right you're trying
to win yeah yep right it's I yeah and it
is disappointing and I was talking to
someone who was an organizer for um cube
of truth so cubed truth is also known as
anonymous for the voiceless she was a he
was like a regional director and so not
the very very top level but still and I
was saying to him look you can't run an
organization like a high school clique
like this can't just be about who's
friends with who or who's sleeping with
who or who's cooler is not like you know
there's God like I don't care what the
principles are what you got and I
remember he said to me this is almost a
verbatim quote he said like no it never
ends everything is like a high school
but look you know I do have experience
in other walks of life you know and not
all vegans do not all vegans I know what
it's like to sit down at a at a
boardroom meeting and present research
and findings to representatives of
corporations and large charities and
government agencies and
chair a meeting and do this kind of
stuff you know I and you know most
left-wingers especially look down on
corporations as Eagle heard me look down
on corporation says evil but you
actually learn a lot in terms of good
good corporate practices and how to you
know as you say even Monsanto there they
cooperate they play well with others
because they're playing to win you know
a lot of those attitudes definitely are
definitely are missing but look you know
the flip side is that the internet gives
us a false sense of place and I was
talking to another activist I can name
him I don't think it's doesn't harm his
first name is ally
his name's Ali Tabrizi and he is now
like yourself documentary filmmaker
so like right now he's finishing his
first big professional documentary film
so he's he's a he's off the internet but
when that launches he'll do a press
releases and stuff for it but Ali to
reason I was telling him within his
first year of being an activist on
YouTube he was organizing events with
more than 200 people like 200 people I
think 300 400 people he had all this
positive support at all levels from
individuals and institutions and groups
and you know he had he would throw an
event have people show up to it um and I
do not
I mean after five years you know the
message I'm delivering and I know I know
what I've done that's that's made me
unpopular I'm honest about things like
you know castrating dogs and declawing
cats and killing cockroaches I would
never do so to come back to Gary
Yourofsky I would never do what Gary
Yourofsky does and lie to you claiming
that I never kill cockroaches I actually
I actually do think it's immoral to kill
a cockroach I think you're still killing
an animal but I do it and I'm I'm
willing to be honest about that and if
you if you live in Cambodia you know if
you live in the tropics killing
cockroaches is probably like okay
yeah the New York winter is never cold
enough to wipe out the America the hardy
American cockroach is amazing yes yeah
it's cold so you know I just say you
know but my honesty about all that stuff
you know alienated me but so but the the
point I was just making is it's easy to
lose track of the sense of place and
feel like I'm on the internet there
forum everywhere and you're not the
difference between me and Ally Tabrizi
was that he was in downtown London
England and London England has 200 years
of animal rights activism you know proto
veganism and then veganism that is
really where veganism began they have
the oldest deepest tradition and it's
also you know a huge city in terms of
population and I have not been in London
England so apart from all those other
factors ultimately where you are who you
meet face to face you know those those
still are the real fruits and it
probably is for filmmaking - that's
probably why you need to live in New
York and why you can't do filmmaking in
schenectady or something you know so
politics is even more so right politics
is even more simple well it's also cool
for me to hear than you it sounds like
you've really got interested in this in
the past one year so it'll be fine under
standard stay but my point is I mean you
know I would be really interested to
hear where you're at one year from now
you know so give me six months no but I
would like to hear back from what you're
doing you know in the old days whenever
I did these interviews I'm not gonna ask
you now because I think you're just
putting your plans together I used to
always ask other activists what what are
you planning for the next five years
what do you think's gonna have with you
and the
in the next five years and again I was
talking to people of all ages I can't
just say these were young people some of
them were 21 but some of them were 35
and almost all of them were shocked by
the question like what what do you mean
five years and I got an email I got an
email from one of them a couple months
ago and he said Wow you know what you
asked me that and now it's four years
later and now I look back and I really
think well what if I had a five-year
plan because you know that these these
kinds of questions are not they're not
gonna disappear for us right well and
[Music]
well but that point these other people
in the game I don't think I don't think
Leonardo DiCaprio has a five-year plan I
don't think natalie portman has a five
o'clock there there are a lot of people
who are not even thinking in those terms
and you know I think the people with a
five-year plan are people like PCRM
those are the people who are really
looking to make a difference
in the next five years and one of the
first steps they take isn't narrowing
their focus and limiting their ambitions
to the difference they can make in the
next five years they can't take on
everything
[Music]
even though they only a million other
tricks but you know so we're talking
about 10 20 30 years if you're gonna be
honest we got to look at land use Reggie
water you know yep so the smartest
people the people with money something
clicks like why did it click for me and
not for someone else I did like me any
less than you or whoever I'm talking to
right it may be it may be that would you
come to the end of this research you're
doing your final conclusion is that you
are special and you you you and you
maybe you start to feel comfortable with
that specialness because you know when I
moved to Cambodia you know is there to
do humanitarian work I was there to do
research it was there to make the world
a better place that was already does
it's a strictly vegetarian I was like 98
percent vegan but it wasn't on obscenity
so you know I'm living this this kind of
stranger self this one like guess who
I'm meeting every day I'm meeting the
white people who are there as sex
tourists like a meeting people Cambodia
has no extradition treaties or they
didn't them with any Western but they're
you're meeting people there were
literally murderers there was one guy I
never met him but he was literally an
axe murderer he had killed someone with
an axe it was living there you know
you're being kind of in contrast to you
know yourself and you know the couple
people I knew in the humanitarian field
who may be there with these very pious
motives you're meeting the worst of the
worst oh and the Christian missionaries
of course the people who are there to
convert Buddhists to Christianity you're
meeting these astoundingly immoral
people
so you know I think III do a very
pragmatic down-to-earth
you know sense of ethics but I think
part of that may be in the course the
research you're doing now you're gonna
have to admit to yourself that you are
in some way a special person and of the
other people obviously the other people
who are at the same airport with you in
Cambodia or who even at the same event
with you when you're when you're
involved in veganism or at the same
conference you maybe gonna start to get
a feeling for what
[Applause]
various structures and I would say in
the inner city is in Harlem Compton
there's vegan soul food restaurants
there's you know anyone it doesn't
matter how cute into it doesn't matter
who you are in in Detroit it was about
5050 when we were in vegan restaurants a
lot of the vegan restaurants about 50%
of the guests would be black and also
about 50% of those staff a lot of them
so and you know some of them were black
owned and celebrated as such but know
there's a big african-american interest
in veganism in Detroit and Chicago and
in other places but look all of it is
dwarfed by China and Taiwan I mean you
don't even have to get into India I mean
India it's a bit of a question mark
which way India is gonna go on on
veganism but the you know Buddhism is
the sleeping giant buddhism and taoism
and confucianism behind veganism and the
the potential of even something like
Judaism because you know Israel and
tel-aviv specifically Israel has become
massively vegan and there's really no
basis for veganism and in Judaism you
know there's a very vague intellectual
tradition or concern you can try to
characterize that as being the basis for
why why so many Jewish people became
became vegan but it's not it's not as if
they're quoting the Bible or something
it's if anything it's probably because
they're disillusioned with the Bible
that they get interested in veganism but
no so I mean you know these these there
were big sources of non Western and
non-white impetus behind veganism
however
PCRM take a look right now what
ethnicity or SP serum what even peda
people death treatment mammals so you
know there's no doubt that the
established and moneyed elites are the
ones who are actually sitting up and
running the the few organizations we've
got there's not not a lot to talk about
and that comes back to donor driven
activism which is what I've been saying
that well what if I'm trying if I start
my own organization like that who do you
think I'm doing fundraising for 21 year
old edgy vegans no it's people over 65
it's people who are retired and you have
a certain amount of their income they're
giving to charity every year and you're
trying to make the pitch to them so
that's where the disconnect is and you
know obviously I think you just have to
have a realistic attitude towards that I
mean ultimately if you want to
specialize the vegan charity look let's
say I said I'd love to do this website
of a specialized vegan charity just
dealing with elephants but it's a vegan
charity helping elephants I have a fair
bit of experience the elephants through
my years in Southeast Asia nobody is
really gonna care nobody's gonna support
you or not support you because of your
gender ethnicity you know etc if they if
what they care about is is elephants so
in that way also specialization is a way
out of the the identity politics and
ethno socio-economic you know bind of
our time to say hey look this is what
we're really great at well we're great
at is water pollution or elephants or
you know specifically challenging school
board's about propaganda that says milk
and eggs are okay this is what we're
great at so the color of our skin
shouldn't be what we're judged by I
think that's what all of us can hope to
do you know regardless of what color of
skin it is you or you were born into
yeah okay we're past one hour no well
think thank you and as they say look
don't act like it's hard to find me I've
certainly got an eventful year coming up
I think I'm moving back to Taiwan we're
really preparing for that but I'd be
really interested you're at the kind of
fact-finding stage but you know please
do keep the show over we really just
hear what the next steps are that you
take
keep you up to date and I'm sure I'll
have some other questions along the way
and you know I appreciate you giving me
the time great thanks thanks for calling
bye bye